README.md, before:

## Architectural Roadmap
- Dual-Issue Superscalar Front-End
- In-Order Commit ROB
- Precise Trap / Exception Support
- M-Mode RV32I + Zicsr
- Harvard Split BRAM IMEM + External DMEM
- 256-Bit "Walking Window" Prefetch
- Single LSU (Wishbone Classic)
- Store / Load Buffering + Queue
- 6-Stage Pipeline

## Overview
Anvil-Pro is a performance-oriented RISC-V softcore designed for powerful and lightweight FPGA compute. It supports the base RV32I + Zicsr ISA, M-mode execution, Harvard-style split memory, and a single, adaptable Wishbone Classic DMEM bus. Michroarchitecturally, it utilizes a 6-stage pipeline, an in-order commit reorder buffer, single LSU synchronizationIt is optimized for minimal fabric usage, synchronous BRAM IMEM, external RAM chip for liberal DMEM capacity. The core is provided as synthesizable SystemVerilog, and is can be used for performance FPGA compute, reference simulation, research and education, and as a foundation for custom RISC-V system designs.

## Frontend
### Fetch Methodology
Anvil-Pro’s front end is designed to sustain a 2-wide issue demand while minimizing redirect penalty and keeping FPGA fabric cost low. Sharing an external instruction interface with the DMEM subsystem was evaluated and rejected: bus arbitration and protocol state add latency, introduce additional control complexity, and reduce deterministic control of fetch timing. Instead, Anvil-Pro uses a strict Harvard organization. IMEM is implemented as inferred synchronous BRAM, allowing instruction fetch to run independently of LSU traffic.

With BRAM-backed IMEM, the remaining optimization is microarchitectural. Canonical queue-driven fetch buffering was initially deployed, but the additional state (FIFO depth, fill/drain behavior, tagging, and boundary handling) increased area and amplified redirect recovery cost. The final design uses a custom 256-bit “Walking Window” prefetch mechanism that exploits wide BRAM reads and dual read ports. Two adjacent 128-bit aligned windows track the canonical PC and are incremented alongside it. Decode requests are satisfied by slicing 32-bit instructions directly from these windows, allowing the BRAM -> IF/ID path to remain direct with no additional stateful staging.

Redirects are wired directly into the registered BRAM address path, so a control transfer immediately updates the fetch address without draining or refilling an intermediate queue. Because no FIFO sits between BRAM and IF/ID, redirect recovery does not pay a queue drain/refill penalty; the next-path instruction becomes visible as soon as the redirected BRAM read returns. This keeps the front end small, deterministic, and tightly aligned with FPGA memory behavior while still providing enough lookahead to sustain a 2-issue demand under sequential flow.

### Issuer Architecture
In many dual-issue designs, the backend is responsible for dynamically resolving hazards through stall propagation, cross-lane forwarding, replay behavior, and inter-stage backpressure. While flexible, that approach introduces long combinational paths, additional control state, and significant verification complexity. These mechanisms directly impact Fmax and make timing closure more difficult.

Anvil-Pro adopts a different philosophy: hazards are prevented at dispatch rather than repaired during execution. The issuer enforces a strict structural contract that guarantees the backend never encounters a stall condition. Once an instruction is dispatched into the pipeline, it flows forward unconditionally. There are no backend freeze signals, no inter-stage ready/valid backpressure, and no replay logic. All throttling occurs exclusively at issue time through refusal.

Traditional stall-based pipelines require bubble injection when a hazard is encountered. If one instruction cannot advance, pipeline registers must be frozen and bubbles inserted to preserve correctness. In a paired in-order machine, this typically forces both lanes to stall to maintain age alignment, even if one instruction could logically continue. This demands inter-lane stall propagation, stage enable gating, and careful management of partially executed instructions.

Anvil-Pro eliminates this entire category of behavior. ALU operations complete in fixed latency. Memory operations are injected into the Memory Queue and complete asynchronously. ROB entries are allocated strictly at issue. Future multi-cycle executions can be buffered simmilar to the memory queue. Once dispatched, instructions are never held mid-pipeline and no bubbles are injected due to backend hazards.

If the next instruction cannot safely dispatch due to operand availability or structural capacity, the issuer simply refuses it. The backend continues draining in-flight work but never freezes. Throughput modulation therefore occurs exclusively at issue time rather than through dynamic stall control or bubble propagation.

Under strict in-order issue, issue refusal and traditional stall models exhibit similar IPC behavior during true dependency waits. The primary advantage of Anvil-Pro’s methodology is structural: reduced control depth, simplified verification, and improved timing characteristics. The tradeoff is modest additional resume latency when a previously blocked instruction becomes eligible to issue, since it must traverse the full backend pipeline rather than resuming mid-stage. It was concluded that the simplicity and timing benefits generally outweigh the marginal latency impact for this implimentation.

### Issuer Contract
The issuer guarantees that any dispatched instruction group satisfies the following invariants:
```bash
- Slot 0 must be older # Dramaticly simplifies control and forward logic
- LSU access must be through slot 0 # For a single LSU, drain is the bottleneck rather than fill
- Memory queue must have slots available including older in pipeline requests (x-1 = capacity) # Prevents stalls on full queue
- No dependencies on unresolved loads # Prevents stalls for arbitrary load times
- ROB must have slots available # Mandatory to functionality
- No slot 0 + slot 1 dependencies # Prevents double execute combinational path
- No slot 1 issues when badData flag is active # Ensures all instructions are valid
- No same cycle dual redirect issues # Simplifies redirect conflicts
- No Write-after-Write hazards in a cycle # prevents age wise forwarding
```

## Backend

## Dataflow Diagram
![Pipeline](Pipeline.png)

Commit message:

README
Updated the overview section to clarify the architecture and features of Anvil-Pro, including its dual-issue capability and memory architecture.

README.md, after:

## Architectural Roadmap
- Dual-Issue Superscalar Front-End
- In-Order Commit ROB
- Precise Trap / Exception Support
- M-Mode RV32I + Zicsr
- Harvard Split BRAM IMEM + External DMEM
- 256-Bit "Walking Window" Prefetch
- Single LSU (Wishbone Classic)
- Store / Load Buffering + Queue
- 6-Stage Pipeline

## Overview
Anvil-Pro is a dual-issue RISC-V RV32I + Zicsr softcore targeting FPGA platforms. The core supports M-mode execution, a strict Harvard memory architecture, and a Wishbone Classic data interface for external memory integration.

The microarchitecture implements a 6-stage pipeline with in-order commit via a reorder buffer, a single load/store unit with buffered memory queueing, and a 256-bit BRAM-backed “Walking Window” instruction prefetch subsystem. Instruction memory is implemented using inferred synchronous BRAM, while data memory is accessed through an external Wishbone interface.

The design is optimized for efficient FPGA fabric utilization, competitive performace, and scalable off-chip data memory capacity. The core is provided as synthesizable SystemVerilog and is suitable for FPGA compute, architectural experimentation, simulation, and custom RISC-V system integration.

## Frontend
### Fetch Methodology
Anvil-Pro’s front end is designed to sustain a 2-wide issue demand while minimizing redirect penalty and keeping FPGA fabric cost low. Sharing an external instruction interface with the DMEM subsystem was evaluated and rejected: bus arbitration and protocol state add latency, introduce additional control complexity, and reduce deterministic control of fetch timing. Instead, Anvil-Pro uses a strict Harvard organization. IMEM is implemented as inferred synchronous BRAM, allowing instruction fetch to run independently of LSU traffic.

With BRAM-backed IMEM, the remaining optimization is microarchitectural. Canonical queue-driven fetch buffering was initially deployed, but the additional state (FIFO depth, fill/drain behavior, tagging, and boundary handling) increased area and amplified redirect recovery cost. The final design uses a custom 256-bit “Walking Window” prefetch mechanism that exploits wide BRAM reads and dual read ports. Two adjacent 128-bit aligned windows track the canonical PC and are incremented alongside it. Decode requests are satisfied by slicing 32-bit instructions directly from these windows, allowing the BRAM -> IF/ID path to remain direct with no additional stateful staging.

Redirects are wired directly into the registered BRAM address path, so a control transfer immediately updates the fetch address without draining or refilling an intermediate queue. Because no FIFO sits between BRAM and IF/ID, redirect recovery does not pay a queue drain/refill penalty; the next-path instruction becomes visible as soon as the redirected BRAM read returns. This keeps the front end small, deterministic, and tightly aligned with FPGA memory behavior while still providing enough lookahead to sustain a 2-issue demand under sequential flow.

### Issuer Architecture
In many dual-issue designs, the backend is responsible for dynamically resolving hazards through stall propagation, cross-lane forwarding, replay behavior, and inter-stage backpressure. While flexible, that approach introduces long combinational paths, additional control state, and significant verification complexity. These mechanisms directly impact Fmax and make timing closure more difficult.

Anvil-Pro adopts a different philosophy: hazards are prevented at dispatch rather than repaired during execution. The issuer enforces a strict structural contract that guarantees the backend never encounters a stall condition. Once an instruction is dispatched into the pipeline, it flows forward unconditionally. There are no backend freeze signals, no inter-stage ready/valid backpressure, and no replay logic. All throttling occurs exclusively at issue time through refusal.

Traditional stall-based pipelines require bubble injection when a hazard is encountered. If one instruction cannot advance, pipeline registers must be frozen and bubbles inserted to preserve correctness. In a paired in-order machine, this typically forces both lanes to stall to maintain age alignment, even if one instruction could logically continue. This demands inter-lane stall propagation, stage enable gating, and careful management of partially executed instructions.

Anvil-Pro eliminates this entire category of behavior. ALU operations complete in fixed latency. Memory operations are injected into the Memory Queue and complete asynchronously. ROB entries are allocated strictly at issue. Future multi-cycle executions can be buffered simmilar to the memory queue. Once dispatched, instructions are never held mid-pipeline and no bubbles are injected due to backend hazards.

If the next instruction cannot safely dispatch due to operand availability or structural capacity, the issuer simply refuses it. The backend continues draining in-flight work but never freezes. Throughput modulation therefore occurs exclusively at issue time rather than through dynamic stall control or bubble propagation.

Under strict in-order issue, issue refusal and traditional stall models exhibit similar IPC behavior during true dependency waits. The primary advantage of Anvil-Pro’s methodology is structural: reduced control depth, simplified verification, and improved timing characteristics. The tradeoff is modest additional resume latency when a previously blocked instruction becomes eligible to issue, since it must traverse the full backend pipeline rather than resuming mid-stage. It was concluded that the simplicity and timing benefits generally outweigh the marginal latency impact for this implimentation.

### Issuer Contract
The issuer guarantees that any dispatched instruction group satisfies the following invariants:
```bash
- Slot 0 must be older # Dramaticly simplifies control and forward logic
- LSU access must be through slot 0 # For a single LSU, drain is the bottleneck rather than fill
- Memory queue must have slots available including older in pipeline requests (x-1 = capacity) # Prevents stalls on full queue
- No dependencies on unresolved loads # Prevents stalls for arbitrary load times
- ROB must have slots available # Mandatory to functionality
- No slot 0 + slot 1 dependencies # Prevents double execute combinational path
- No slot 1 issues when badData flag is active # Ensures all instructions are valid
- No same cycle dual redirect issues # Simplifies redirect conflicts
- No Write-after-Write hazards in a cycle # prevents age wise forwarding
```

## Backend

## Dataflow Diagram
![Pipeline](Pipeline.png)
